plugins/git-helpers/commands/commit.md, before:

---
description: Create commits with well-formatted messages
argument-hint: [-s|--staged]
allowed-tools: Bash(git:*)
---

# Commit Command

Create a commit with a well-formatted message based on the actual file changes.

## Arguments

- **No flag**: Stage all modified/new files before committing
- **`-s` or `--staged`**: Use only files already staged

## Process

1. **Gather context** (run in parallel):
   ```bash
   git status
   git diff HEAD
   git log --oneline -5
   ```

2. **Analyze changes**:
   - Review the diff output to understand what changed
   - Base your analysis solely on the file contents, not conversation context
   - Determine the appropriate commit type

3. **Stage files** (if not using `-s/--staged`):
   ```bash
   git add .
   ```

4. **Create commit** using HEREDOC format:
   ```bash
   git commit -m "$(cat <<'EOF'
   type: concise description

   - Optional body item 1
   - Optional body item 2
   EOF
   )"
   ```

5. **Verify commit**:
   ```bash
   git log -1 --format="%B"
   git status
   ```

6. **Handle pre-commit hooks** (if files were modified):
   - Check authorship: `git log -1 --format='%an %ae'`
   - If safe, amend the commit with modified files (one retry only)

## Format and Guidelines

See `templates/commit-guidelines.md` for:
- Commit types
- Message format
- Guidelines
- Examples

## Task

Create a commit for changes with $ARGUMENTS.

Use only git commands. Do not use other tools or send additional messages beyond the tool calls.

Commit message:

refactor: inline template content in git-helpers commands
- Remove external template file references that caused path resolution errors
- Delete unused templates directory

plugins/git-helpers/commands/commit.md, after:

---
description: Create commits with well-formatted messages
argument-hint: [-s|--staged]
allowed-tools: Bash(git:*)
---

# Commit Command

Create a commit with a well-formatted message based on the actual file changes.

## Arguments

- **No flag**: Stage all modified/new files before committing
- **`-s` or `--staged`**: Use only files already staged

## Process

1. **Gather context** (run in parallel):
   ```bash
   git status
   git diff HEAD
   git log --oneline -5
   ```

2. **Analyze changes**:
   - Review the diff output to understand what changed
   - Base your analysis solely on the file contents, not conversation context
   - Determine the appropriate commit type

3. **Stage files** (if not using `-s/--staged`):
   ```bash
   git add .
   ```

4. **Create commit** using HEREDOC format:
   ```bash
   git commit -m "$(cat <<'EOF'
   type: concise description

   - Optional body item 1
   - Optional body item 2
   EOF
   )"
   ```

5. **Verify commit**:
   ```bash
   git log -1 --format="%B"
   git status
   ```

6. **Handle pre-commit hooks** (if files were modified):
   - Check authorship: `git log -1 --format='%an %ae'`
   - If safe, amend the commit with modified files (one retry only)

## Commit Types

| Type | Use when |
|------|----------|
| `feat` | Adding new functionality |
| `fix` | Fixing a bug |
| `refactor` | Restructuring code without changing behavior |
| `chore` | Maintenance tasks, dependencies, configs |
| `docs` | Documentation changes |
| `test` | Adding or updating tests |

## Message Format

```
type: concise description in imperative mood

- Optional: area or component affected
- Optional: another key change
```

## Guidelines

- Analyze the actual diff, not the conversation context
- Message should reflect the current state of the implementation
- Be specific about functionality, not generic
- Focus on WHAT is being done, not HOW
- Use imperative mood: "add", "fix", "implement"
- Do not mention specific files or technical decisions
- Do not reference future tasks or architectural reasoning
- Include a body only when the change spans 3+ functional areas (keep to 3-4 concise list items)

## Task

Create a commit for changes with $ARGUMENTS.

Use only git commands. Do not use other tools or send additional messages beyond the tool calls.
